# 1. Introduction <!-- {docsify-ignore} -->
The main objective of this simulator is to allow users to develop functionality for UAM/AAM and realistically simulate flight plans and navigations of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) in urban scenarios. Inside this main objective, there are some sub-objectives:

- **Develop and test UAV autonomous control software and services implementations:** onboard and offboard control systems for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles could be implemented and tested.
- **Develop and check UTM services:** UTM services and frameworks could be developed and tested to validate if proposals are valid. Information between aircrafts and UTM services can be exchanged through topics, stored and analyzed after simulation for further analysis and debugging. 
<!-- UTM services could be implemented in whatever platform you want if the platform is compatible with ROS. -->
- **Provide realistic dynamics simulations of hundreds of UAVs inside an urban area:** due to the physics engine of the Gazebo simulator and its possibilities, UAV dynamic behavior could be implemented, making the simulations close to real world behavior.

## How is the simulator composed?
To archieve the objetives described before, the simulator is composed of 3 main and essential components/technologies:
-   **Gazebo**: Gazebo provides the entire physics and dynamics engine simulator, as well as the environment and collision simulator. Using Gazebo, UAVs can be placed in a world, the world can be populated with obstacles, buildings, etc. Using UAVs' plugins, the behavior of the UAVs can be implemented, making the UAVs fly autonomously. Communication channels between UAVs and UTM services is also implemented using this plugin system.Moreover, Gazebo allows the use of different type of sensors and hardware, allowing to extend the UAVs' capabilities. You could find more information about Gazebo in U-TRAFMAN in the [Simulation environment/Gazebo](https://i3a-navsys.github.io/utrafman_sim/#/sim_environment?id=_22-gazebo).
-	**ROS**: ROS (Robotic Operating System) is a middleware that provides a communication system between different processes. In U-TRAFMAN, ROS is used to communicate UAVs with UTM services and other software. Topics and services are used to abstract communication systems from the development point of view. You could find more information about ROS in U-TRAFMAN in the [Simulation environment/ROS](https://i3a-navsys.github.io/utrafman_sim/#/sim_environment?id=_21-robotic-operating-system-ros-1).
-   **MATLAB**: finally, MATLAB is used to provide a way to launch simulations, run UTM services and to analyze the data gathered during the simulation. MATLAB is used due to its simplicity and its powerful tools to analyze data. Anyway, MATLAB is not mandatory to use the simulator, as communication between UAVs and UTM services, and between UTM services, is done using ROS, so any other tool that can communicate with ROS can be used with the simulator. You could find more information about MATLAB in U-TRAFMAN in the [Simulation environment/MATLAB](https://i3a-navsys.github.io/utrafman_sim/#/sim_environment?id=_23-matlab).

## Previous knowledge
The simulator is built using ROS and Gazebo, so it's necessary to have some knowledge about these tools. Nowadays advanced concepts are not used, but knowing how ROS network works, the use of packages, how to create a topic, how to create a service, etc. **is a must**. If you are unfamiliar with ROS, you can read the [ROS wiki](http://wiki.ros.org/ROS/Tutorials) to learn the basics. If you are not familiar with Gazebo, you can read the [Gazebo tutorials](http://gazebosim.org/tutorials) to learn the basics. 